[Music]
Hello, welcome to Papo na Arena, your
weekly podcast where we recommend and
exchange content that we've read, listened to, and
watched, always bringing the
product perspective to the discussion. I'm Artur, and
this week's episode is the size of a pineapple,
and I'm X. I thought that because this week is
a special program, there wouldn't be any
updates, but here it is! It's huge, man, a
pineapple is big! Yeah, man! Yeah,
and in today's edition, it's a
special edition where we're going to talk
about Product Hero, right? We've already
interviewed a series of professionals,
including the top two
most listened-to episodes, which are Product
Heroes,
and today we're going to talk with
Lucas Matos, who is Senior Product Manager
at Serena and will introduce himself better
soon. Lucas, welcome to Papo na
Arena, my friend! Good, good! What an honor! After
I've been stalling for a while, it's already over for having
done this Product Hero podcast for a
while, but I'm thrilled to share it
here with you. Without a doubt, the podcast
I've been most excited about since it was launched, it's
replaced all the others.  The news
that I was fighting for my time to be able to
listen to, so the animal is here, even more so
now with Carlitos AL's victory,
we can celebrate here, this is the
Band of tennis, man, he only plays tennis, he
only has tennis here in the footage, even
if he's hitting others,
right? It's good, but anyway, to start,
Luquita, introduce yourself, tell us a
little about your story, where you
came from, what you
do, what you do besides playing tennis, right? Well,
tennis is what I've
played the least. So let's tell a little about my
career.
Artur already mentioned that I
'm currently the Senior Product Manager at Serena,
and here's a fun fact: I'm from Juiz de
Fora, Minas Gerais. So, despite what
everyone here in São Paulo confuses,
thinking I'm from Rio, I'm from Juiz de Fora.
And man, Serena
has the highest concentration of people from Juiz
de Fora by CNPJ outside of Juiz de Fora,
so this only reinforces that the Juiz de
Fora community is strong, the base is very strong, and I
think to try  To summarize my
journey a little, it's been four
to five years since I started working as a Product
Manager. But whenever I look back at
my career, I realize that I was already
working with products even though I wasn't a product manager or even knew what a
product was.
I started my career selling
airplane parts for an American company.
This was only because I had just
returned from an exchange program; my English was good. It
was my first professional experience; I
had no knowledge of the
aviation market. It just fell into my
lap, and it was incredible. After that, I worked
at an agency and then became an
entrepreneur. I think you learn a lot from doing a little bit of everything, right? So, far from the glories we expect from entrepreneurship, I went through the hardships of seeing the business start, then having to restructure everything. And there I understood that, being the
sales person for new business, I was the one
closest to the client, and being closer to
the client, I could bring
the inside insights into what
we needed to build and how
we were going to build it. So I realize that
I was already working with the product. This
entrepreneurial journey started back
in Juiz de Fora with Mercado Lead, and then I came
to São Paulo.  Paulo, after that I went into business with
a performance marketing agency.
I joke that I
sold my burger joint to work
at McDonald's. We had a partner,
one of the biggest lead generators
in the world, Queen Street. I left
Danel Leads to work at Queen
Street. Queen Street basically later
bought Mercado Lead, which was
our startup. After Queen Street, that's
when I actually got into product. I
went through Stone, where I got to
work with Artur for the first time as a
leader, then Loft (repeating the previous job, and I'm missing a
third to request a song on Fantástico,
but I don't think he's coming to Serena), and
I'm fine here, so I'll see what
the future holds. But that's it, you
see, you repeated the mistake twice, let
's see if it'll be a third time. Oh, Lucas,
you've been around a lot before getting into
product, haven't you? You were an entrepreneur, you worked in
sales, and you even sold airplane parts.
In this trajectory, what do you
think? What were the things that
helped you when you started working
with product? Well, each
of the experiences brought
skills that I see...  As a
product person, you need to have and
use a lot of
communication skills in sales, from how to
structure a presentation, which is something
we do every day,
but also verbal communication, how to
align well with
internal stakeholders and eventually with the
client. So this helped a
lot. The aviation market has its own
particularities. What I did was
brokerage of
aeronautical parts. So let's suppose a
company here in Brazil, Tan, needs
a part. We would buy it in the
American market and bring it here. And, man,
the aviation market is extremely
urgent because it's a
very expensive market; having an aircraft
grounded generates a very
large liability. So this sense of urgency,
being able to organize things well, even the
processes, I think has helped me to this
day in my product career. Going
through consulting, I see that the
ability to analyze and structure
problems well is fundamental. And it has
also played an important role in my
product career.
What do you think you lacked in terms of
experience when you entered
product? You thought, "Wow, I did
n't have this much in my previous experiences,
and now I have to catch up on
this skill."  Writing
history in a roundabout way isn't a joke,
but without a doubt, I think it was the part,
let's call it the technical part, of the
product person,
defining the roadmap, how
we were going to build things, and
also having dialogues with the
technology team, knowing how to question whether it would
actually take as long as we
thought it would, and then how
we could break that down
into smaller tasks,
smaller deliverables that would generate value for the
user but take less time.
So
I think that day-to-day experience
with technology peers was what made the
biggest difference. What was missing, you know, I didn't have
that good background in that area.
And what's your opinion
on frameworks, which gets a little into
this technical part? Well,
frameworks have a fun fact that I have
n't mentioned here, but I did three
degrees, I didn't graduate from any of them, but one of
them was statistics. And,
people in the exact sciences, and especially
statisticians, forgive me for the comparison.
Maybe, but I don't know, a framework for me is
like a math formula. If you do
n't know where to apply it, how to use it, it's
useless.  I did an exchange program and
finished high school in New Zealand, and it
was crazy because there, during
math and physics tests, they gave you
all the formulas on the back of the paper during exams, and we
here are used to memorizing everything. I'd think, "Wow, great!
So I'm going to
ace the test!" But no, the
questions required you to know how to use and
apply the formulas. And then you'd get confused, you'd think, "
Where am I going to put this
formula here?" Frameworks, for me,
are the same thing. It's no use
being stuck memorizing that stuff
and not knowing the right time to use it. But it
helps a lot in day-to-day work. I think
structuring
processes isn't really a process, I think it's more about the
way of thinking. So, frameworks that
I like to use a lot, I use them when
prioritizing a task, and
also when breaking down problems. I think that
helps me when doing
user research, understanding what
we should
extract in a discovery process. I think having
some already validated tools helps
shorten paths. Okay, man,
speaking a little bit about another line of thought, which
is a topic commonly
addressed here on the podcast, you as an
avid listener.  You know very well how
the day-to-day is going, are you using anything
from there? In what situations are you
applying it? Good listener and student, man, I
also took the PR Arena course with F and
Artur, and it really boosted things after
that. It's a good example for me of
how it's not exactly a framework, but it
helps me structure problems. So
sometimes I'm with... Obviously, I use PT all day long.
I even shared it in the course itself with
Efren, right? I
use it in my day-to-day life for the most
mundane tasks, even when I'm stuck
with an analysis. So I use it a lot.
But bringing it back to the
previous question, I end up structuring
many of the problems I'm
trying to tackle there, dividing it halfway
with Chat PT as if it were a pair.
So I'll make a documentation, for
example, a PRD, I'll share it
with the technical team, an initial view. I
write everything the way I think,
then I ask Chat PT to refine it. It
helps me think about points that maybe I
had left loose, metrics.  Maybe
I hadn't thought about it, and it
helps me access it better, but besides
that everyday use, today it's
also part of one of the products
I'm working on here at Serena. To
give you some quick context,
Serena, I think everyone here knows
solar panels. So imagine being able to
put a solar panel on your house and get a
discount on your energy bill.
Serena guarantees you a discount on
your electricity bill without you
needing to install a solar panel. We
have our own generation, and the customer
only gets the good part of the
discount. And the contracting process,
not through Serena itself, but in this market,
we also need to communicate with the
energy distributor. So here
in São Paulo, I don't know, Enel, and in
Minas Gerais, Semig. And one of the pieces of information
we need, we only get this
data from the customer's electricity bill.
So it's a process that
has a certain natural friction, and
we've learned a lot that in a
web flow, as it was traditionally
for us, the user entering
the registration page and sending the data... there was a...
Fiction, and many people
abandoned it, and we have invested and
contributed quite a bit today in
conversational chatbots for WhatsApp, so with
integrated EA, right? So, the conversion rate
we have from leads—I'll call them
eligible leads—is much higher in
WhatsApp conversations than with
people who go through our
flow, and we understand that it's precisely
because people are there
naturally conversing. You send an audio message, and then
you can transcribe the audio
and respond to the user. We're
testing this, and it's a product vision. We
can also make it easier for the
client to send the invoice, and we read
the invoice data directly and
return to them whether it's legible or not.
And all this at the end of the day is the US
LLM. So it's part of the day-to-day of the
product I'm working on, and taking advantage of the
perfect hook, the
perfect hook, we're getting good at
bringing the hooks, but bam, the
third edition of the course for PMs is
coming. You'll probably listen to
this podcast on Wednesday or
Thursday, and the course is this Saturday.
On July 20th, Efren and
Ikira will be there to also talk a
little about how he's using and how
he set up his GPT for
event mapping and everywhere
I go. I share that, everyone's
using it, and I've used it too, man, I've used it, it's
good. Lukita, I'm going to invite him again, right?
He didn't just
participate, he participated in the first
edition, and his boss sends a hug
to Amu too. Amu said, "Wow, man,
I'm going to have to take this course
because after what Lukita did, he's
been using this thing every day, all the time,
every moment." In the
second edition, Lucas went there to talk about
how he was using it daily,
so if you want to talk about it in this other
edition, you're already invited. You were already
invited before, but anyway, if you
want to take the course, there's that
awesome 15% discount in the
comments. The course will be this
weekend, so take advantage, it's really great!  Here it is,
who did it and
can attest to it, and that's it, great! And
taking advantage of this, I'll ask another
question: you've already made the
mistake of working with me twice, as you
yourself said, and you know how much
I like a good
workaround. So, if you add up all
these years we've worked together, there was only
a little bit of a workaround, right? Just
a little bit, slightly.
But I wanted to know your
opinion, especially since you didn't get
directly involved in product and ET, etc.
What's your opinion on
workarounds in code-low-code and in the
product cycle? How useful was that
for you?
That mistake of having that mistake
committed twice? That double mistake
also brings learning.
Artur's way of putting tests in
production brings a good feeling, a little
thrill of testing
things and questioning how to build
faster, right? I remember a
phase working at Quartu where I
kept a post-production test in my notebook
just to question how I
could think differently. And man,
tools in code-low-code...  This is not just for
product people, but for
developers too. I see it
as... well, you can't even say it's a
necessary evil, I think it's really
necessary. It's to shorten the
learning curve, to shorten
the delivery and validation time. So there were
some really cool cases like that at
Tembici when we worked
together, and at Loft, now experiencing this
too at Serena. For me, an
important part of a
product person using low-code is when
they can show its value to
engineering people.
Engineering people can also kind of provide
support, I'll call it that, to make it
easier to use. There's a
very emblematic example for me from Loft in
this sense: I used Postman a lot
at Loft to access some
internal APIs and look up information
that we didn't have an
ideal interface for. I
could eventually prioritize
building an internal platform with the team,
but either I built an
internal platform for my use as a
product person and a few other
people from operations, or we
delivered value to the real estate agencies, to the
end clients, which generated
the business.  Well, in fact, the
technology and engineering team at
Loft... I think they've always understood and provided me with a
lot of support, you know, in being able to use
tools in low-code to
accelerate my deliveries and theirs.
So, for me, it's extremely
necessary, almost in the context of
what we were talking about... I see a lot of
people who are hesitant about using it, like, we've already talked about it, you've already talked about it here on the podcast, I've heard people, colleagues, say, "Wow, I
'm ashamed to use GPT, man, I don't know, would
you be ashamed to use a calculator?"
You wouldn't, man, a tool is right here in
PR to make things
faster and get you to the other side
easier, right? And
taking this as a starting point, what
are your favorite tools, your go-to
tools for these kinds of things, more in
low-code? And taking advantage of your
point, I'm of the opinion that every PM should
know how to use Postman or
Sweger. With that in mind, you'll go far and you
'll save a lot of work for your
engineering team with integrations and other
things. But I wanted to put on
record here that I'm a
Postman fan.  That's really cool because
when I discovered the power of
Sweger, the whole team, after I
joined, and I think one of the first
things I talked to the engineers about
was, like, "Hey, share the
documentation with me," and often there wasn't any,
and they were surprised that I was
advocating, like, "Let's take
some time to structure the
documentation," because it's
great for Dev Experience, but for me it
also helped me better understand how
our application worked. So,
what are, I don't know, if I'm thinking about an
acquisition flow, really? What are
the mandatory data that we
need? What can we make more
flexible or not? At Loft, we
experienced this a lot, right? When uploading
properties to our platform, there were a
lot of fields that were mandatory.
Some people didn't even know
why they were mandatory, they just were. And
when I stopped to look at the
documentation and understand, I was even able to
better question the decision-making.
But man, I think one of the tools
I like the most, the one I've used a lot,
was Google Sheets, which is super
overrated, but I think Google
Sheets is amazing, I think it's the first.  The last time
I used it, as far as I can
remember, was at Queen Street in
consulting. We generated leads for
large insurance companies here in Brazil to
distribute to
insurance brokers. Queen Street was really
good at media optimization and
ensuring that we sent leads to
brokers with the highest
conversion potential. But for that, we
needed to feed our model with
campaigns and know which leads
converted, or if they didn't,
why not. Few brokers
used CRM; some used multi-calculation software,
but integrating with multi-calculation software would be a
struggle. I remember us thinking, "Damn, I just
grabbed it and said, 'How am I going to
build this using Zapper and Sheets? How do I
put all the leads we sent
them into a big sheet
using the WScript from Google
Sheets? Also, have some formulas so that
when the broker changed a
cell, it would update the date
they modified that lead?' Things as
simple as that, but in practice,
I created a little CRM in Google
Sheets that was super functional for the
brokers."  This week, the
sales team here at Serena
said, "We need to give the
new
sales team a simulator for our
discount. We already have something," I
said. "Wow, we have a simulator in
our acquisition flow for the
end user. We didn't have a
simulation tool," and literally, I
relied on the fact that our URL was
parameterizable. So, if I changed a
parameter in the URL value, I could
change what was being presented in the
simulator to the client. I built a little script
explaining very clearly: "
Change the value here, change the
distributor here, and click
on this link here, and then you'll have
the perfect simulator." It
took me half an hour and was
as simple as using Sheets. I
really like Postman, but I think my
favorite for almost everything is Zapper. I
find it bizarre how many
things you can connect to
increasingly robust services. Zapper
now also has AI, and it can
handle some data; you
describe it there, and it has a little
CoPilot.  There, you also describe
what formatting you need to
do; it already creates the condition. It's
definitely very powerful for me. Being
able to build and think about
integrations with Zapper along the way is
very good, very good. And you've already
mentioned some cases there, but I
want to...  To find out which is your
favorite hack, this one will even win the C
FR quality award, so let's see. But what
was your favorite hack? It doesn't
have to be the prettiest, right? It can even be the ugliest one
that worked
best, right? The exact hack is the ugliest one. Man,
hacks, I think the ones I mentioned
recently were
cases that I always remember very well, like
that CRM Zinho from C Street
using literally Google Sheets, but in
the Tem Bice. Man, I think that was a huge
value of the Tem Bis product team,
that the guys were really good at
using low-code tools, and there was
a specific product there that I
inherited and then evolved, which
was a tool that we built
with retooling, Zapia, and Google Sheets
to control access to a
specific area. We were taking a
step back, right? In the context of Tem
Bice, Tem Bice, for those who don't know, is the company that
operates Bike Itaú. So, have you ever
ridden a little orange bike here in São
Paulo or Rio? The company behind
Bike Itaú is...  We have a project with iFood to
rent electric bicycles to
delivery drivers. Unlike
everyday users who pick up bikes at
stations, iFood users also
had support points where they could
go to rest, heat up their meals,
connect their cell phones to charge, and
pick up bicycles. They also
picked up kits from iFood, like those
waterproof jackets and their
delivery bags. They rented those things,
and we needed to control
these loans, also checking if the
user had credit or not. And this
is a merit of Tzão, the
Itaú bike program was used to users who
had credit cards. So it
was standard to say in the app, "User has a
credit card, it will be released." When
talking to the delivery driver, this is an unbanked population.
So we built this little
tool for
the people in the operations team at the
support points to receive
payment for the bicycle rental
in cash. And then it would literally be
entered into a Tzão system to
check the customer's balance
and see if they had
any issues.  Regarding the pending issue with renting the B bike here,
renting the bag, and all of that again
using Retool without any
development effort, it was the
product people who took the tool, took
the documentation we had
in-house from our partners, and built it.
So, this was the
coolest little product, it was born from a
makeshift solution and ended up solving a
real problem. It was really awesome.
And following in the same vein of pride, is there
any other
product, service, or functionality besides the one you told us about that
you're most proud of having launched?
I have a great affection
for this iFood Pedal product.
When I joined, we were
starting a pilot in São Paulo and Rio, then
we did more than seven
capital cities, and it had something that
really resonated with me, which was the
real, direct impact. You could see
the product's characteristic
of being a digital product, but it's
also in the physical world. You see
the bike, you see people riding
the bike, and I often went to that
support point I mentioned, to exchange
ideas with the delivery drivers. And then I...  I had the
experience of exchanging ideas with the
delivery guy, who told me, "Man, I'd be
living on the street if it weren't for this, I
could get a bike here for R$10 to
ride, and I don't know what I would
do." So I think this is one of the
products I'm most proud
of having helped build because it has
a real impact
on society. So I think this was
one of the coolest cases. And the
product I'm building now at
Serena is a product I'm very proud of, and it
also has an impact aspect. And
then you combine it with life purpose, and wow, I
love nature, I love being at the beach, I love
sailing, I love wiping out (listen carefully,
wiping out, not surfing, wiping out). And so,
working on a product that I know has an
environmental impact, that's
helping us electrify
our energy matrix, making it accessible
for people to consume clean
and cheaper energy, is really cool to
see. And I see that we're
managing to adapt very quickly,
building within our
contracting flow. It has
some particularities, so I
deliver Serena's energy to a
client for a...  Regarding regulation, I
need information that's only
available on the customer's electricity bill.
Imagine the bizarre friction it is
for the customer to share their electricity bill.
Sometimes nobody even has access to their electricity bill, let alone
share it with a
service you don't know. Our
product, I call it, is
too good to be true. I tell you, "
Want to save 14% on your
electricity bill without doing anything, without installing a
solar panel? Just sign this contract."
People say, "Wow, that's like a
Tigrinho game!" It sounds like a joke, but I swear I
was looking at a product,
probably a competitor's,
Serena, this week, and they talked about it in a
work chat, and that was exactly my
thought. I said, "Damn, man, it has
n't been that long, and then producer NS keeps
trying to understand, 'Damn, where's the
cat here? Do you know where this is? How does this
thing work?'" But it's totally real. That's
it, man.
And I'll say this upfront for everyone: there's
no such thing as a free lunch. Serena
makes money; it's a publicly traded company.
The model is valid; in reality, it's just that
we can actually generate energy
through cheaper, sustainable sources
and deliver this...  This is
beneficial for consumers,
but the friction in our workflow has
forced us to think
more creatively about how to guide
users through the
hiring process, which was heavily based
solely on landing page flows.
We've had some really great learning experiences
using WhatsApp
chatbots, which are truly conversational,
to provide a better
user experience. They can ask questions,
share their invoices through
WhatsApp, and use EA and LLM
to read invoices and determine if the client is
eligible. So I'm proud of the
impact, and I'm proud because we're
actually applying technology
to solve the problem. It's really cool.
And moving on to another topic,
what was your biggest
mistake as a product person, and what
was the main lesson you
learned from it? We've already talked about
working with UR twice.
That's tough, except for that, which is the
competition,
right? You go there, damn, you can make a mistake
once, and the AIX made a mistake once and I'm doing
super well, and not make a mistake a second time. It's
already deviated a few times since...  I've already
tried to get him to repeat that mistake
too, man. I think the basic
product flaw... well, it's going to be hard to
remember some specific examples,
but I certainly get frustrated thinking
about situations where I didn't do the basics of
asking the client or asking the
user what they expected, and
we ended up spending much more effort than
we needed to build a certain
product. I think
I inherited that more than I actually made those mistakes.
I think along the way
I saw
people make decisions that ended up
injecting too much rust into the product,
which wasn't necessary for
that moment in the business. So I also
think that, perhaps with less maturity,
I must have made that same mistake, and at the
time I wasn't aware of it,
wanting to build a hyper-
ultra scalable product right
away, and then realizing that
you're just generating complexity
and not solving any problems.
So I think that's the main mistake that, to a
greater or lesser degree, I've made,
inherited, and experienced firsthand. The
consequences of these
mistakes are very profound, and we've
reached that point where
you, as a listener, must already have...  Listened, and
not just as a listener, right? A fun fact here:
Lucas and I have lived together for a few years
now, period. Okay, three already. If you
work, aa, work, live together, man, yeah, but so, you
know, there's that thing
about work, work, work, but don't
forget that commas mean
pauses, and as a good sommelier,
I took a sabbatical once,
and I wanted you to tell
us a little about your experience of
being part of a
sailboat crew that almost stopped in Africa,
and how that process was, you know, of
deciding to take a break, breathe, and then
come back after the pause and the comma,
come back to do what you've been doing.
I just wanted to say that every time
you say that phrase on the podcast,
a panda in Asia dies of
disgust, man. I argued with Artur once when
I said, I said, "Dude, man, I'm
with you," you've said it at least
three times, man. Of course not, I said, "Dude, I'm listening, listening, listening." You know, man, it's
obvious, that's it, that's it, you
have to prepare now, the x, then a little
jingle every time.  That he
released that count is a count together
exactly, man, it was an adventure, a
literal adventure, so at the end of
last year, I think taking a step back, man, I
always thought it was cool the
idea of ​​getting on a boat in the middle of
nowhere, looking to one side, water, to the
other, water too, no. How many
times have you watched that movie with
Wilson, the one who's castaway? That's why, right? Oh, maybe it was, no, no,
consciously, but man, I'm from Juiz
de Fora, I've already said here, it's true that the
penthouse in Juiz de Fora is valued
because it has a sea view, but man, I
'm not from a family that was born on the beach,
raised with sailing boats or
money to do that, but I, man, I liked it. And
then I followed Uncle Spinelli on
Instagram, Uncle Spinelli is
definitely the biggest legend
as a sailing instructor in Brazil, he's
76 years old, I think now, and he's already done
that Brazil-Cape Town crossing in
South Africa three times, right,
round trip, uh, ours would be another one
of those attempts by Uncle Spinelli, and I wanted to
take the course, Uncle Spinelli has  A weekend course
in Ubatuba where he goes
sailing for three days along the coast, comes back
to explain how
a sailboat really works, how to navigate a
sailboat. And then, man,
alignments like that, very much by
God's will. Last year I was
working at Lemon, and then on
Monday I received the news that the
product network and some other people
had been laid off, they were
restructuring the product area. On
Wednesday, man, I saw a post from my uncle
on Instagram saying, "Hey, there was a
cancellation for the next trip
to South Africa," and then the
application form, and I got the form, it was like, "
Wow, what's your
experience with sailing, mechanics,
electricity?" And I was like, "Nothing, nothing, nothing, I just
have a lot of desire." And on Friday I
received the offer to work at
Serena, so it was all an alignment there,
I said, "Man, it's meant to be." So it was
20 days in total, leaving from Ubatuba, the
destination was South Africa, it was a trip
that was supposed to take 35 days, but
we had a lot of headwinds. And that was going to
prolong the trip a lot, which...
People planned to do it in 35 days, but we
were seeing that it would take maybe 50 or 55
days if nothing went wrong, and then we
could run out of water and food.
So, it was a very wise decision
from a 75-year-old captain. We turned back,
but even so, in
those 20 days, I experienced calm seas,
very rough seas, waves of 6 or 7 meters. The
boat felt like a washing machine,
throwing you everywhere. But it
was great for those aspects of life, you know?
I think the first is learning to deal
with discomfort because, obviously, there was fear in
the first few nights, but then you got
used to it, and you realized that the biggest
challenge was the discomfort itself. You go
to the bathroom and the boat is rocking, you
go to cook and the boat is rocking, and
you want to sleep and the bed is wet. That was
it. And there was, I think, the thing about being able to
stop to do the commas here, the
work, work, work. So,
in one week I read three or four
books, things I hadn't read all
year until then. So I stopped to, I think, I
managed to breathe, see what made
sense to me, it did a lot.
Also during that period, Leno... well, there's a book
I highly recommend, "How to Prevent
a Climate Disaster" by Bill Gates, which
is amazing. That's when I was sure
I wanted to work in the
energy market and with climate tech,
so it was great. I think the worst part
was I came back on Christmas Eve, and
imagine spending 20 days with four
people you've never met in your life on a
boat that's smaller than a
meeting room, and then, okay, you learn
to be silent, to deal with boredom
too, because there's no internet, it's tough.
And the worst thing was that I came back and
Artur took me to the Morumbi Shopping Mall on
Christmas Eve. So imagine the
trauma of a person, like, I'm still dealing with it
today at the psychologist, I'll send
you the bill, it's very impressive that
you still talk to Artur,
really, that's it, man, these are traumas that are
difficult to deal with.
He made a mistake twice
already, he didn't work with me, how did he agree to
record a podcast with me every week? So,
he's also wrong, he
also needs us, otherwise we
might change our
minds, like, AC
week, you know, that thing that has a beginning,
middle  And that's it, it becomes easy to deal with
all of this, right? We exchange flowers
and affection between us, let's get to our
chat, Lucas
[Music] Okay,
good, so to start,
product management in a tweet,
aligning expectations well,
and that's it, and knowing how to
communicate is the main skill of a
product person, I'd say
communication too. Hey man, you said
you read four books during
your sailing trip, any book you
recommend to the group? It doesn't have to be from
your adventure period, man, there's
one that I'm very cliché with, that
I always say, "So good that they can
ignore you," it's really cool, this book.
To summarize it really well, it says that the
worst advice you can give
someone in life is "Do what you
love." Jobs messed up, he kept talking,
he gave that wonderful speech of his, but
he himself didn't do what he loved. If
he had done what he loved, he would have been
walking barefoot making
art for much longer, and he shows a
lot that the key to being happy
is doing it, he divides it into
three points, he says that
people  Those who are happy at work
have a sense of autonomy. They have a
sense that what they do actually
impacts the lives of other people. And then
the third one, you read a book and
tell me again because I forgot, but man,
he takes and shows several
people who are successful today, and he
says, man, these people—he takes an
example, I don't know, of a guy who worked
in the financial market and decided, in theory, to
leave everything to have a
farm. Wow, he went to do what he
loves. No, man, he was already very good.
As a person in the
financial market, analyzing commodities,
analyzing agricultural production, so
he knew a lot, he knew that
market very well, so he did it very well, he
managed to succeed. There are
simpler examples. He talks about interviews, and the
guy is the author, so he talks
to several people to reach this
conclusion. And there's one that caught my attention
too, where he interviews a
young girl who is a secretary at a
school. She hates her job, it's
super frustrating. And then he talks to
an older woman who has been at the school for
40 years as a secretary, and she loves
her job. But why? Because she...  She's
super recognized for what she does,
everyone comes to tell her she's very good at
it, and she feels a lot of authority
to do what she does, and she
feels that she actually helps people with what
she does, so that's why "So good
they can ignore you" is so good, so
people won't ignore you. So, if you want to
be happy, take what you do well and
[Music]
[Applause]
Country is one that I'm obsessed with, I
think it's amazing, it's on Netflix without giving too many
spoilers, but it's the story of one of the
biggest election crimes in the history
of the United States, a biological weapons attack in the
United States, and the
story of a great religious leader
who also laundered a lot of money in the
United States.
Just watch it, it's awesome because
it's a documentary that uses a lot of
footage from that time because they
recorded everything. It was an Indian leader,
so he recorded everything, so you have
footage from that time, but he interviews
people today, and it's something super
recent, in quotes, in the history of the
United States, from the 70s and 80s maybe, but
you have no idea that it could have happened, that it did, so
no  I'm going to
give more spoilers, but Wild
Wide Country is what grabbed me and I
went crazy wanting to watch all the
episodes quickly. It's a documentary series, I
'm a big fan of music, tell us about an
artist or musician
you like. I listen to a lot of
everything, it's something I'm
listening to a lot, uh, Slipknot is the link,
now we have Bazooka, I'm a huge fan of Slipknot, man,
I'm a huge fan of Slipknot.
And I'm already looking forward to this
year's Fast, so I'm listening to Slipknot. But this
is a curious fact, man,
some days I arrive at the office
listening to Slipknot, that force of hatred,
and other days I'm listening to
mantras and
completely zen music to be
able to focus, so there's not
much of a parameter. And a fun fact here,
from someone who lived with Lucas for a few years and worked
with him a few times, is that he
's a great musician too, he
loves to drum things, like washing
dishes, he finds a way to make a
noise, a good noise, even with a
fork. He even plays all kinds of instruments,
that's it.  Swing is swing,
but taking advantage of it... What's the thing
you, besides talking
to me, can't give up
in your good routine? Well,
I want to say it's sports. Although
I'm not very disciplined, I
realize how much of a
difference it makes for me to expend energy,
and so I adapt. Now I've
discovered that, for example, swimming at night
works very well because if I do
any other activity at night I get
very wired, and then I go to sleep very
late, I wake up the next day at the last minute.
But swimming, I come back feeling great and fall asleep again.
So, I try not to
give up doing sports, and I
hate the gym, but I do it thinking about
sports, so I enjoy playing tennis, swimming,
running. That's what makes a big difference in my
daily life, and eating well, and
sweets in moderation, right? A little
salad, seeds...
By the way, I'm ordering my little
burger for tonight again. You
ate a burger yesterday, man? Oh, leave me alone, they
're pregnant, man! They're pregnant!
He's trying to compete with Nina to see who
will grow up first, damn it! To close
our...  fafum Lucas, what's your
favorite product? Spotify, man. Spotify
is a rip-off, I've been a subscriber forever. I
think the first music streaming service
I used was Ardio. Wow, Ardio was
really good, man, and I still am today.
Man, it had a John Mayer album
that no other
streaming service has, and it was one of the best
albums. And then the Ex was also really
cool, like, damn, man, I miss it. I was going to
say that it was very good-looking for its
time, it had a very clean,
very beautiful design, man, I still have it.  I'm
noticing silly things like that, but
Spotify does it well, I think it has
some things, it manages to run on
multiple platforms very well, you know? I'm
listening to it, but I'm using an Apple Watch,
and I can do the same thing, it's the standard for
any streaming service, but with an Apple
Watch, it works well, and I was
playing a game mirroring it on the TV, seeing that
it has a dark mode, I think those are very
basic, simple functionalities, but in
everyday life I think they make a
difference, but the core of the product itself, I
think the recommendation is extremely good,
I discover a lot of people through Spotify.
Now it's also in the era of "eii,"
adding some ways to generate
specific playlists, and I remember
I took Artur's product course in
2017, maybe,
wow, one of the cases we were
discussing was a product, what it would do,
I remember we
discussed precisely about a "
party" feature, so
everyone could listen at the
same party, put it in a queue, and shortly
after Spotify launched the functionality.
So it does the basics well, innovates, and...  Well,
the main thing he sets out to do is
deliver the music, deliver it with quality
audio, great variety, and highly recommend
[Music]. It's really
good after this lesson on
Spotify functionalities, I
just wanted to thank Lukita for his
presence for years, putting up with me. And even
after standing us up several times, you
actually came here and gave your name, so
man, send a shout-out, closing, man, I ask you to
leave a message, go for it,
the space is yours,
work, work, no lie, damn, I was going to have to
cancel this, it was going to be
lost,
man. Thank you, I'm so excited to be on the
other side here now seeing things
happen live, I don't have to wait
to listen to the episode, but I'm
anxious to listen.
Yeah man, I'm happy to be exchanging ideas
with you guys, I think you've done a
job of really raising the bar for the
product community for a while now
with Arena, but the podcast, man, I said
at the beginning here, has
really become something that I'm consistent
with, that I listen to every week,
so I'm super happy. Thank you for the invitation, if
you can, watch it, if you can't.  He watched the
Alcaraz vs. Djokovic match and had a
tennis lesson and called him for a dispute.
We still have to have ours, right? In
São Paulo, BH, we have to
decide. I'm running away. I'm running away. I'm
running away. Well, that's it, guys. Don't
forget to give those five stars
and share with this share, right?
You have to share with the guys,
adding your
playlists, follow us on social media, both
on Instagram and Twitter, on
LinkedIn @prkarena @x @ArturClose with
K. If you want to follow Lucas,
his LinkedIn will be here in the
comments. Anyway, that's it, we'll
listen to each other at the arena anytime.
Thanks, see you next week. Thanks, thanks.